The word "halibut" means "holy flatfish" (hali=holy + butte=flatfish) because it was only eaten on holy days.
Most fish reproduce by laying eggs, though some fish, such as great white sharks, give birth to live babies called pups.
Lungfish can live out of water for several years. It secretes a mucus cocoon and burrows itself under the unbaked earth. It takes in air with its lung through a built-in breathing tube that leads to the surface. A lungfish has both gills and a lung.
Some fish, such as the great white shark, can raise their body temperature. This helps them hunt for prey in cold water.
The oldest known age for a fish was an Australian lungfish. In 2003, it was still alive and well at 65 years old.
Fish use a variety of low-pitched sounds to convey messages to each other. They moan, grunt, croak, boom, hiss, whistle, creak, shriek, and wail. They rattle their bones and gnash their teeth. However, fish do not have vocal chords. They use other parts of their bodies to make noises, such as vibrating muscles against their swim bladder.
Fish can form schools containing millions of fish. They use their eyes and something called a lateral line to hold their places in the school. The lateral line is a row of pores running along the fish’s sides from head to tail. Special hairs in the pores sense changes in water pressure from the movements of other fish or predators.
Interesting Starfish Fact
Starfish don't have a brain or blood
Starfish are not fish. Neither are jellyfish.
Since a fish’s jaw is not attached to its skull, many fishes can shoot their mouths forward like a spring to catch startled prey.
Electric eels and electric rays have enough electricity to kill a horse.
Sharks are the only fish that have eyelids.
Fish have sleep-like periods where they have lowered response to stimuli, slowed physical activity, and reduced metabolism but they do not share the same changes in brain waves as humans do when they sleep.
Some fish, such as the herbivorous fish (grazers), often lack jaw teeth but have tooth-like grinding mills in their throats called pharyngeal teeth.
Most fish have taste buds all over their body.
An estimated one third of male fish in British waters are changing sex due to pollution in human sewage.
Saltwater fish need to drink more water than freshwater fish. Since seawater is saltier than the liquids in a fish’s body, water inside the fish is constantly flowing out. If they didn’t drink to replace the lost water, saltwater fish would dry up like prunes.
The oldest fishhook ever found dates back to about 42,000 years ago.
Most fish have little salt in them. Sharks, however, have meat as salty as the ocean they live in.
Most brands of lipstick contain fish scales.
Most fish can see in color and use colors to camouflage themselves or defend themselves and their territory. Most fish have the best possible eyesight for their habitat and can most certainly see you peering at them in a fish tank. Some fish can see polarized and ultraviolet light.
A fish does not add new scales as it grows, but the scales it has increase in size. In this way, growth rings are formed and the rings reveal the age of a fish.
Fish that have thin fins with a split tail indicate that they move very quickly or may need them to cover great distances. On the other had, fish that live among rocks and reefs near the ocean floor have broad lateral fin and large tails.
A ship has a heavy keel in the lower part to keep it from capsizing. Fish, on the other hand, have the keel on top. If the paired fins stop functioning to keep the fish balanced, the fish turns over because its heaviest part tends to sink, which happens when it dies.
On average, flying fish can glide 160 feet (50m), but have been known to glide as far as 660 feet (200 m). And they can reach heights up to 19 feet (6m).
An inflated porcupine fish can reach a diameter of up to 35 inches (90 cm). It puffs up by swallowing water and then storing it in its stomach. The stomach increases in size with more water. If the fish is taken out of water, it can inflate in a similar way by swallowing air.
A fish can drown in water. Like humans, fish need oxygen, so if there isn’t enough oxygen in the water, they will suffocate.
Although the fangtooth fish is only a few inches long, it has teeth about the size of a human’s.
Interesting Fangtooth Fact
Their teeth are so big that they can't close their mouths completely
The fish in the middle of a school control the school. The fish on the outside are guided by those in the middle. Only bony fish can swim in highly coordinated groups.
Most fish cannot swim backwards. Those that can are mainly members of one of the eel families.
Fish would suffocate if they tried to chew because chewing would interfere with water passing over their gills.
The biggest fish in the world is the giant whale shark, which can grow to nearly 60 feet, or the length of two school buses. It weighs over 25 tons and eats mainly plankton. It has over 4,000 teeth, though they are only 3 mm long.
The most poisonous fish in the world is the stone fish. Its sting can cause shock, paralysis, and even death if not treated within a few hours.
The word “piranha” is from the Tupi (Brazil) pira nya and means “scissors.” Found in freshwater rivers in South America, piranhas have razor-sharp teeth. They typically eat fish, insects, seeds, fruit, and even larger animals such as horses. While there are no proven reports of piranhas killing a person, they do eat human carcasses.
The fastest fish is the sailfish. It can swim as fast as a car travels on the highway.
Interesting Seahorse Fact
Seahorses are poor swimmers and can die of exhaustion in stormy waters
Seahorses are the only fish that swim upright.
The slowest fish is a seahorse. It swims so slowly that a person can barely tell it is moving. The slowest is the Dwarf Seahorse, which takes about one hour to travel five feet. It even looks like it is simply standing up, not swimming.
Some fish do not have scales. Sharks, for example, have rough sandpapery skin instead of scales.
Fish have multiple Christian and pre-Christian overtones. For example, the Greek word for fish is Ichthys, which is an acronym for “Jesus Christ, God’s Son, Savior” and was used to mark early Christian tombs and meeting places. Because of their association with fertility, fish have also been linked to Isis and Aphrodite.
In Japan, the fugu, or puffer fish, is a succulent but lethal delicacy. It contains tetrodotoxin, a deadly poison. However, it is so delicious that Japanese gourmets risk their lives to prepare it. To make this high-risk dish, chefs must have a certificate from a special school that teaches preparation of this toxic fish.
Hammerhead sharks can live in schools of more than 500 sharks. The strongest female swims in the middle. When she is ready to mate, she shakes her head from side to side to signal the other female sharks to move away so she is the center of attention.
Some desert pupfish can live in hot springs that reach temperatures greater than 113° F.
A male emperor angelfish lives together with up to five female mates. If the emperor angelfish dies, one of the females turns into a male fish and becomes the leader of the group.
Interesting Fish Fact
Mudskippers are also able to jump 2 feet in the air
The mudskipper is a fish that spends most of its time out of water and can “walk” on its fins. It carries a portable water supply in its gill chambers when it leaves the water. It can also breathe through the pores of its wet skin.
There are approximately 32,000 different kinds of fish in the world today, which is more than all the other kinds of vertebrates combined. Scientists are discovering new species all the time.
The batfish plays dead when danger is near. It floats motionless on its side when scared, making it look like a dead leaf floating on the surface of the water.
Anableps, four-eyed fish, can see above and below water at the same time.
Sometimes tornadoes pick up fish while traveling over water and carry them over land, where the fish rain down. These “fish showers” have been happening for thousands of years. Roman writer Pliny the Younger describes this phenomenon in the 1st century A.D.
Male anglerfish are much smaller than the female. While the female can reach up to 24 inches long, the males barely reach 1.6 inches long and live as parasites on their mates. They stay together for life. As the male ages, he gets smaller and smaller. The female anglerfish’s light is always “on.”
Scientists have explored only 1% of the ocean depths. They believe millions of new kinds of animals and fish are down there, waiting to be discovered.
Empty dogfish egg cases sometimes wash up onto the beach. Some people call them mermaid purses.
Interesting Catfish Fact
The entire body of a catfish is covered with taste buds
Catfish have over 27,000 taste buds. Humans have around 7,000.
Humans have been amazed for centuries that salmon, after journeying across the ocean, can find the river where they were born. In the Yukon River in Alaska and in Canada, certain tagged Chinook salmon covered nearly 2,000 miles in 60 days. Salmon also have adapted to live in a variety of aquatic environments, including rivers, lakes, estuaries, coral reefs, and the open sea.
Fish were the first vertebrates with bony skeletons to appear on Earth. Unlike today’s fish, early fish had no scales, fins, or jawbone, but they did have a dorsal fin.
Hagfish are some of the slimiest animals on earth. An Atlantic hagfish can make enough slime in one minute to fill a bucket.
Unlike bony fish, sharks and rays do not have swim bladders. They have to swim all the time, even when they are sleeping. Otherwise, they will sink to the bottom of the ocean.
A seahorse can move each of its eyes separately. One eye can look forward while the other looks backward. Seahorses can also change their color to match their surroundings.
The term “fish” is used when referring to one species of fish (e.g., 10 salmon are 10 fish). The term “fishes” is used when referring to more than one species (e.g., 10 salmon, 3 trout, and 1 angel fish are 14 fishes).
Unlike most other fish, the ocean sunfish does not have a tail. A female sunfish can lay 300 million eggs each year. Each egg is smaller than the period at the end of this sentence.
Interesting Lamprey Fact
Lampreys are jawless and have a round sucker-like mouth
Lampreys and hagfish are the most primitive form of fish still living today.
Most types of seahorses pair for life. Female seahorses lay their eggs inside a pouch on the male seahorse’s belly. When the babies are ready to hatch, the male holds onto a piece of seaweed with his tail and rocks back and forth until the babies pop out of his pouch.
The freshwater Pygmy and Luzon gobies of the Philippines, the saltwater Marshal Islands goby, and the tiny rice fish from Thailand all reach a maximum length of 1/2", roughly the size of a grain of rice. They are typically considered the world’s smallest fishes.
A baby seahorse is called a "fry."
The number of people who fish for sport in America—about 40 million—outnumbers all the country’s golf and tennis players combined.
Jellyfish are found in every ocean of the world. They are even found in some freshwater lakes and ponds.
Jellyfish range from the size of a thimble or the eraser tip of pencil to approximately eight feet in diameter with tentacles that reach 200 feet. That is as long as two blue whales.
Each jellyfish tentacle is armed with thousands of cells called cnidoblasts. Inside the cnidoblasts are nematocysts, each of which contains a coiled stinging thread. When a fish or other object becomes tangled in the tentacles, the pressure inside the nematocysts causes the venomous threads to uncoil like a spring-loaded harpoon.
The jellyfish’s main defense mechanisms are its stings and its transparent body, which makes it easy for it to hide.
In an episode of Friends, one of the characters applies urine to a jellyfish sting. However, neuroscientists say urine is ineffective.
Despite popular belief, urine is not an effective treatment for jellyfish stings
Many neurosurgeons say that popular remedies for stings—such as vinegar, urine, or meat tenderizers—do not help stings. Instead, the best thing to do is get out of the water immediately, and wash the affected with salt water (NOT fresh water). Salt water will deactivate the stinging cells, while fresh or tap water will reactivate them. The best way to remove the cells is with something such as a credit card.
Jellyfish have a short tube that hangs down from its body. The tube acts as both its mouth and its digestive tube. In some jellyfish, the central tube is surrounded by frilly pieces that look like curly ribbons in the water. These are called oral arms or mouth arms.
Jellyfish do not have brains, hearts, ears, heads, feet, legs, or bones. Their skin is so thin that they can breathe through it.
While jellyfish do not have a brain, they have an elementary nervous system with receptors that detect light, vibrations, and chemicals in the water. These abilities, along with the sense of gravity, allow the jellyfish to orient and guide itself in the water.
Jellyfish are invertebrates, which means they are animals without a skeleton. Approximately 95% of their body is water.
Jellyfish are usually seen in shallow coastal water; however, scientists have discovered a few species that live at depths of 30,000 feet (9,000 meters). While most jellyfish prefer warm water, some live in subarctic temperatures.
A jellyfish tentacle can still sting even if it is separated from the jellyfish’s body.
The smallest jellyfish in the world is the creeping jellyfish. It has bell disks from 0.5 mm to a few mm in diameter. It reproduces asexually by splitting in half. Another contender for the smallest jellyfish is the extremely toxic Australian Irukandji, which is only the size of a fingernail.
The largest jellyfish in the world is the Nomura’s jellyfish. Other candidates for the largest jellyfish are the Lion’s mane jellyfish and the Stygiomedusa gigantea.
The giant jellyfish called Stygiomedusa gigantea has been seen only 17 times in the last 110 years.
The man-of-war is not a true jellyfish; true jellyfish usually have four oral arms
The Portuguese man-of-war looks like a jellyfish, but it is not a true jellyfish. In fact, it is not even a single animal. It is a siphonophore, which is an animal made up of a colony of organisms that work together. Specifically, the man-of-war consists of four separate polyps. The top polyp is a gas-filled bladder that reminded people of the sails on a once common ship called a man-of-war.
Jellyfish produce both asexually and sexually. They are usually male or female, though hermaphroditic species have also been found.
Jellyfish live from a few hours to many months. One species has been reported to live as long as 30 years. Jellyfish in aquariums typically live longer than those in the wild. Because jellyfish are so fragile, it’s easier for people to capture jellyfish in the polyp stage when they are the least vulnerable.
Most jellyfish are passive carnivores. They feed on plankton, crustaceans, other jellyfish, fish eggs, and small fish. They eat and void through the same hole in the middle of the bell.
Jellyfish have several predators, including other jellyfish, sharks, tuna, swordfish, sea turtles, and one species of Pacific salmon.
One species of jellyfish, the Turritopsis nutricula, is also known as the “immortal jellyfish” because it can transform from the mature medusa state back to the polyp state, thereby essentially avoiding death. It accomplishes this through the cell development process called transdifferentiation.
The type of jellyfish most seen on the shores of North America and Europe is the Moon jellyfish. This type of jellyfish is typically blue or pink and is found in waters approximately 20 feet (6 meters) deep. Its sting is usually mild, but can leave an itchy, red rash.
Even a dead jellyfish can sting.
Jellyfish have lived in the waters of the world for more than 650 million years, long before the dinosaurs, making them the oldest multi-organ animal.
Portuguese man-of-wars can grow to be 165 feet (50 meters) long, although 30 feet is more typical. On a baseball diamond, they would reach from home plate to first base and more than halfway to second. Man-of-wars can sometimes be seen in groups of 1,000 or more floating in warm ocean waters. To avoid threats, they can deflate their air bladder and briefly sink under the water.
The upside-down jellyfish does not float in the water. Instead, it anchors itself to the ocean floor, with its short arms and tentacles reaching up. It looks like a bowl of plants rather than a typical jellyfish.
Crabs have been known to hitchhike on jellyfish
Crabs have sometimes been seen hitching a ride on a jellyfish. The hard, outer shell of the crab protects it from the jellyfish’s sting. The crab also usually catches a little of the food the jellyfish traps.
There are more than 2,000 different types of jellyfish. Approximately 70 can hurt people, with the box jellyfish (Chironex fleckeri) being the most dangerous. Scientists believe that there could be as many as 300,000 different species of jellyfish yet to be discovered.
Jellyfish are not fish. They are actually plankton from the phylum Cnidaria (Greek for “stinging nettle”) and the class Scyphoza (from the Greek “cup”). Some aquariums are trying to popularize the terms “jellies” or “sea jellies” instead of jellyfish.
Jellyfish move in essentially two ways. They take water in their bell and then squirt it out behind them, which creates a jet of water that moves them forward. They also drift on water currents.
The body of a jellyfish has six parts. The inner layer is the gastrodermis, which lines the gastrovascular cavity. The middle layer is a thick substance called the mesoglea. The outer layer is the epidermis. It also has an orifice and tentacles.
Researchers suggest that the shipping industry has artificially distributed jellyfish into nonnative habitats where they then colonize. Ships transport jellyfish around the world in two ways: 1) juvenile jellyfish (polyps) attach to ship hulls and travel with them and 2) ships take on ballast water in originating harbors and then dump their ballast water (along with jellyfish and other organisms) in new waters. Billions of gallons of ballast water are transported annually around the globe.
Jellyfish are aggressive colonizers. Eight years after comb jellyfish were introduced into the Black Sea in 1982, they totaled about 900 million tons. Jellyfish have caused $350 million in losses to the Black Sea’s fishing and tourism industries.
Environmental stress may increase jellyfish swarms. Jellyfish are one of the very few creatures that can adapt to ocean dead zones, or zones where there is little oxygen and lots of pollution. There are over 400 marine dead zones in the world.
A group of jellyfish is called a bloom, swarm, or smack.
Environmental stressors may increase the size of a jellyfish bloom
Jellyfish blooms near Japan can have over 500 million jellyfish, with each jellyfish the size of a refrigerator.
Jellyfish have been responsible for temporarily shutting down a nuclear power plant in Japan after becoming stuck in its cooling system. The Japanese called these jellyfish echizen kurage or, in English, Nomura’s jellyfish.
Jellyfish account for more than 10 times the weight of the annual fish catch around the world.
Approximately 150 million people annually are exposed to jellyfish around the globe. Around 200,000 people are stung each year in Florida and 500,000 around the Chesapeake Bay.
Many scientists believe that environmental stressors—including climate change, pollution, overharvesting of fish, and dams—have led to the proliferation of jellyfish.
Jellyfish are harvested for collagen, which is used in a variety ways, including treating rheumatoid arthritis.
In 2007, jellyfish blooms decimated Northern Ireland’s salmon farm killing more than 100,000 fish.
Jellyfish belong to the Phylum Cnidaria. All animals in this group are radially symmetrical. Other animals in this phylum include hydras, sea anemones, and corals.
In some countries, jellyfish are a delicacy
In several parts of the world, jellyfish are considered a delicacy. For example, in Malaysia, people call them “music to the teeth.” Approximately several hundred metric tons of jellyfish a year are eaten at $15 a pound, making it a multimillion-dollar business. The most commonly eaten jellyfish is the Cannonball jellyfish.
An American tourist died in 2002 after being stung by the deadly Irukandji jellyfish off the waters of Australia’s Great Barrier Reef. This jellyfish is only the size of a thumbnail but can have three-feet-long tentacles. Most jellyfish have stingers on their tentacles, but the Irukandji jellyfish has stingers on its bell piece as well.
An adult jellyfish is named a “medusa” (plural “medusae”), after the Greek monster Medusa that had snake for hair.
In the 2008 movie Seven Pounds, the character Ben Smith, an IRS agent played by Will Smith, commits suicide by sharing his bathtub with a deadly jellyfish. The title refers to the “seven ponds” of flesh Will Smith gives to other people to make up for killing seven innocent people in a car accident.
Jellyfish digest their food quickly. It would be difficult to float if they had to carry around large amounts of food.
The venom in a single box jellyfish can kill 60 people.
Jellyfish kill more people than sharks do each year.
Different jellyfish have babies in different ways. Some jellyfish shoot eggs out of their mouth to be fertilized outside the body; others carry the eggs in their mouth until it develops enough to live on its own.
Most jellyfish have two basic life stages. In the first stage, they are called polyps and grow by making buds, like plants. The polyp then buds off a young jellyfish called an ephyra. After a few weeks, the ephyra becomes an adult jellyfish or medusa.
A dead jellyfish can still sting
Jellyfish are made up of more than 95% water. If they are removed from the water, they collapse and die.
The box jellyfish is unique because it has 24 eyes, four parallel brains, and 60 anal regions. Two of its eyes can see color. It is also one of the animals in the world that has a 360-degree view of its surroundings Box jellyfish are not considered “true” jellyfish of the Scyphozoan class.
Jellyfish that stay near the sunlight at the water’s surface tend to be colorless. Jellyfish that swim deeper are often red, purple, green, yellow, and sometimes they may even have stripes.
A military robotic jellyfish has been created to go on search-and-rescue and survey missions. The silicone “Robojelly” uses hydrogen and oxygen for fuel as it swims, so its only “exhaust” is heat and water. Its muscles are made from shape-memory alloy, a metal invented by NASA that “remembers” its original shape.1
The top of the jellyfish that looks like the top of a mushroom is called the bell.
Scientists place true jellyfish and box jellyfish into two different groups. True jellyfish are scyphozoans, meaning “bowl animals.” Box jellyfish are cubozoans, meaning “cube animals.” A true jellyfish’s bell is rounded, like a bowl. A box jellyfish bell has sides and rounded corners—shaped similar to a box.
Scientists have developed antivenom for box jellyfish stings. In Australia, where box jellyfish live, ambulances and hospitals keep the life-saving venom on hand.
The Lion’s mane jellyfish is one of the largest of the true jellyfish and can have tentacles up to 120 feet (36.6 m) in length. Its bell can measure up to 7 feet, 6 inches (2.3 m) across. It lives in oceans around the world and feeds on small fish, shrimp, and other small jellyfish. Its sting is painful, but not deadly for humans.
The deadliest and most venomous sea creature in the ocean is the box jellyfish, which is also known as the “Marine Stinger” and the “Sea Wasp.”
The venom in a single box jellyfish can kill 60 people
On average, one person per year is killed in Australia by a box jellyfish. Box jellyfish may kill as many as 100 other people per year in other parts of the world, such as the Philippines, Indonesia, and Thailand.
Both true jellyfish and box jellyfish use their stinging tentacles to catch shrimp and small fish for food. However, box jellyfish are more active hunters, mainly because they have eyes, unlike true jellyfish. They are also better swimmers. A box jellyfish can swim at speeds of up to 4 mph, which is faster than most people can swim.
The uncoiling of the jellyfish’s small stingers is one of the fastest actions in nature. Stingers shoot out even faster than a bullet from a gun.
A box jellyfish sting can kill a person by stopping his or her heart in about two minutes.